# Contribution guidelines

Thank you for investing your time and considering contributing to Retis! :tada:

This guide documents the process to get changes merged into this project, what
one should expect, as well as prerequisites for pull-requests and patches to be
considered acceptable.

## Reporting bugs

Following the guidelines will help the community understand bug reports, which
in turn will help in reproducing, triaging and fixing those bugs.

### Before submitting the report

1. Check for similar opened or closed issues. If a similar issue is still
   open, please add a comment there.
1. Check the version used when the bug was triggered. If it was not the latest,
   please reproduce with it.

### Submitting a good bug report

1. Use a clear, concise and descriptive title.
1. Include the output of `retis --version` in the description.
1. Describe how to reproduce the bug, in clear exact steps, with examples. The
   community should not have to guess extra steps, configuration, prerequisites
   and spend a lot of time gathering this information to work on fixing a bug.
1. How reliable are those steps to reproduce the issue?
1. Describe the outcome of those steps.
1. Then describe what would have been expected and why.
1. If it is performance-related, include numbers.

### Following-up on the report

* It's OK to ping *once* or *twice*.
* But give time to the community to reproduce and come up with a solution.
* Also note we all have limited time and prioritize things.

## Suggesting new features

Features requirements vary depending on users, use cases, priorities, etc. But
expressing an interest is valuable as it can help prioritize things and
shape the actual behavior.

### Before suggesting a new feature

1. Check if the feature isn't already available. See the tool help.
1. Check it is not already being planned by looking at the different
   [milestones](https://github.com/retis-org/retis/milestones) and
   [issues](https://github.com/retis-org/retis/issues). If a matching issue is
   found, please comment on it to express an interest and make suggestions.

### Adding an issue to request a new feature

1. Use a clear, concise and descriptive title.
1. Describe the environment on which the feature would be used and provide
   value.
1. Provide a detailed explanation of what you'd like to be implemented, the
   expected output and behavior.
1. If applicable, explain what the current behavior is lacking and how different
   you'd like it to be.
1. Understand we have limited time and do prioritize things. In this regard,
   external contributions for new features are highly recommended and can have a
   great impact on choosing the direction of the project.

## Code contribution

### Guidelines

1. Follow the [coding style](#coding-style).
1. Document functions, structures (including members), enums, ..., and the code
   itself. You can look at the existing code to understand what level of
   documentation we expect.
1. Add unit tests.
1. Base new work on top of the `main` branch.
1. Use conscious language. Sometimes the information to collect (eg. in the
   kernel) is not converted yet or is part of a stable API; we can still use a
   better word in Retis. A good example is the Linux `nf_conn->master` object in
   the `ct` collector: we expose it as the "parent".

### Coding style

We strictly follow the Rust coding style as enforced by `rustfmt` and we also adhere the
[Linux kernel](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/process/coding-style.html) coding style
as enforced by `checkpatch.pl` and particularly its
[networking](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/process/maintainer-netdev.html#multi-line-comments)
flavor for the BPF parts. `checkpatch.pl` can generate false
positives, and in such case the formerly described coding style rules
take precedence over its suggestions.

### Events and Rust bindings

If you are introducing new events or modifying the content of existing
ones, bindings must be refreshed.
If you are introducing a new event type, you have to follow all the
steps below, conversely, in the case you are adding one or more
members to an existing, and already annotated data-structure, you can
skip the first:

1. Annotate the target type with `__binding`.
1. Run `make gen-bindings`.
1. Commit the generated files and include them in your pull-request.

While not strictly required, it is advisable to submit binding
introductions or modifications in a separate patch to facilitate the
review process.

Rust code is generated by the means of `bindgen`, and this means you
need to install it in order to complete the process.
For minor modifications, it is strongly recommended to use the current
version.
The current version can be found in the top comment of one of the
headers under the directory
[bindings](https://github.com/retis-org/retis/tree/main/retis/src/bindings/).

When updating the version of `bindgen`, instead, the current
stable has to be used. It is also preferable that this kind of
pull-request does not contain any other logical change other than the
version bump.
Installing a specific version of `bindgen` can be done with
`cargo install bindgen-cli@<VERSION>`.

Lastly, `gen-bindings` target also requires python bindings for Clang and its
dependencies installed (i.e. libclang).
You may install the Python bindings for Clang using your system's package
manager or any other preferred installation method.
For example, on Fedora, you can simply use `dnf -y install python3-clang`.

### Backward compatibility

Retis offers some compatibility guarantees as described in the [compatibility
page](compatibility.md). Make sure those guarantees are met.

As part of this, backward compatibility of generated events at collection time
should work. This is done in `retis-events/src/compat/compat.rs`. Make sure to
do the relevant changes in there.

### Opening a pull-request

1. Before opening the pull-request, test the changes. Yes, even for those simple
   one-liner last minute changes.
1. Check the following commands do not return an error:
   1. `cargo fmt --check`
   1. `cargo clippy -- -D warnings`
   1. `make lint-ebpf`
   1. `make test V=1`, or to include runtime tests,
      `CARGO_TARGET_X86_64_UNKNOWN_LINUX_GNU_RUNNER=sudo CARGO_CMD_OPTS="--features=test_cap_bpf" make test V=1`
   1. `make pytest V=1`
1. Make sure commits are
   [signed off](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/process/submitting-patches.html?highlight=signed%20off#developer-s-certificate-of-origin-1-1).
1. Use a clear, concise and descriptive title.
1. If the pull-request is linked to an issue, or based on top of another
   pull-request; reference those.
1. Describe the environment on which the feature is used and provide value.
1. Provide a detailed explanation of why the feature was added, how it was done
   and what is the expected output and behavior.
1. If applicable, provide a step-by-step guide on how to test the feature.
1. For pull-requests demonstrating a change to start a discussion, please add
   "[RFC]" in the pull-request title. Once in a state ready to be formally
   reviewed for inclusion, remove it.

### Following-up on the pull-request

1. As new versions of the pull-request are pushed, make sure to mark applicable
   conversations as
   [resolved](https://docs.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/commenting-on-a-pull-request#resolving-conversations).
1. If the pull-request has a conflict and cannot be merged, please rebase on the
   latest `main`. This can happen at any time, e.g. when other pull-requests are
   being merged.

### Code coverage

Considering the importance of tests, it is highly recommended to
introduce new tests aimed at covering as much code as possible.
To locally assess the amount of code covered by the tests, you need
first to install the following:

```
$ cargo install cargo-llvm-cov
$ rustup component add llvm-tools-preview
```

After installation, you can execute `make test COV=1` to obtain
coverage statistics following the execution of all tests.

Note that if your default toolchain is not installed via rustup, you
can set `$CARGO_OPTS` to specify your rustup-installed toolchain
(i.e., use `CARGO_OPTS=+nightly` for the `nightly` version).

To report previously generated coverage statistics, you can issue the
command `make report-cov`.
The target behavior can be adjusted using the available options. For
instance, to enhance readability, you can set `CARGO_CMD_OPTS=--html`
and generate an HTML report instead.
For further details on how the target behavior can be customized, run
`CARGO_CMD_OPTS=--help make report-cov`.

### Python bindings development

When changing python bindings, it can be useful to quickly build and install the
current code into a virtual environment for testing. An easy way to do it is by
using [maturin](https://github.com/PyO3/maturin):

```
$ python -m venv venv && source venv/bin/activate # jump into a virtual env (required)
$ pip install maturin
$ maturin develop -m retis-events/Cargo.toml -F python-lib
$ python
>>> import retis
```

### Documentation preview

HTTP documentation is automatically generated for releases and the
`main` branch. However, if you want to generate a local preview of the
documentation, you can use [MkDocs](https://www.mkdocs.org/) directly:

```none
$ pip install -r docs/requirements.txt
$ mkdocs serve
```

Then point your browser to `localhost:8000`.
