# Retis - Tracing packets in the Linux networking stack & friends

Retis aims at improving visibility of what happens in the Linux networking stack
and different control and/or data paths, some of which can be in userspace. It
works either in a single collect & display phase, or in a collect then process
fashion.

## Event collection

The entry point for most of the use cases is the `collect` command, which will
install probes and gather events for instant reporting on the console or for
later processing writing events to a file (or both). In addition to
collect-level options, `retis collect` has the concept of collectors. Those
collectors can be enabled individually and will act on different parts of the
networking stack to retrieve specific information.

Currently supported collectors are [listed below](#collectors). By default Retis
will try to load all collectors if their individual requirements are met (e.g.
the `ovs` collector needs the OpenVSwitch kernel module to be loaded) but
collectors can be explicitly selected too (here if prerequisites are not met an
error will be returned). If no specific option is used, Retis will by default
output the events to the console.

```none
$ retis collect
00:42:00 [INFO] Collector(s) started: skb-tracking, skb, skb-drop, ovs, nft, ct
00:42:01 [INFO] 5 probe(s) loaded
...
$ retis collect -c skb,skb-drop
00:42:00 [INFO] 4 probe(s) loaded
...
```

In order to allow post-processing, events need to be stored in a file. This is
done using the `-o` option (defaults to `retis.data`). To also output the events
to the console in parallel, one can use `--print`.

```none
$ retis collect -c skb,skb-drop,skb-tracking -o
00:42:00 [INFO] 4 probe(s) loaded
...
$ retis collect -c skb,skb-drop,skb-tracking -o --print
00:42:00 [INFO] 4 probe(s) loaded
...
```

### Collectors

Collectors are responsible for filling events and target specific areas or data
types. Some, but not all, install specific probes to build their events.
Currently supported collectors are:

| Collector    | Data collected      | Installs probes |
| ------------ | ------------------- | --------------- |
| skb          | Packet information  | No              |
| skb-drop     | Drop reason         | Yes (1)         |
| skb-tracking | Packet tracking id  | No[^1]          |
| ovs          | OpenVSwitch data    | Yes (many)      |
| nft          | Nftables context    | Yes (1)         |
| ct           | Conntrack info      | No              |

See `retis collect --help` for a description of each collector and its command
line arguments.

[^1]: Probes for tracking packets are always installed by the core.

## Post-processing

Events stored in a file can be formatted and displayed to the console using the
simple `print` command (the events filename used for the input defaults to
`retis.data`).

```none
$ retis print
...
```

But events can also be post-processed. Retis allows to trace packets across the
networking stack and as such the same packet can be seen multiple times (e.g. in
the IP stack, TCP stack, OvS stack & netfilter stack; sometimes multiple times
in each subsystem depending on which probes were loaded). The `sort` command
uses information reported by the `skb-tracking` and the `ovs` collectors to
identify unique packets and group/reorder the events so the same packet can be
efficiently tracked in the stack.

```none
$ retis collect --allow-system-changes -p kprobe:ip_local_deliver \
        --nft-verdicts drop -f 'udp port 8080' -o --print
...
$ retis sort

3316376152002 [swapper/2] 0 [k] ip_local_deliver #304276b119fffff9847c36ba800 (skb 18446630032886128640) n 0
  if 2 (eth0) rxif 2 172.16.42.1.40532 > 172.16.42.2.8080 ttl 64 tos 0x0 id 14042 off 0 [DF] len 32 proto UDP (17) len 4
  + 3316376220653 [swapper/2] 0 [k] __nft_trace_packet #304276b119fffff9847c36ba800 (skb 18446630032886128640) n 1
    if 2 (eth0) rxif 2 172.16.42.1.40532 > 172.16.42.2.8080 ttl 64 tos 0x0 id 14042 off 0 [DF] len 32 proto UDP (17) len 4
    table firewalld (1) chain filter_IN_FedoraServer (202) handle 215 drop
  + 3316376224687 [swapper/2] 0 [tp] skb:kfree_skb #304276b119fffff9847c36ba800 (skb 18446630032886128640) n 2 drop (NETFILTER_DROP)
    if 2 (eth0) rxif 2 172.16.42.1.40532 > 172.16.42.2.8080 ttl 64 tos 0x0 id 14042 off 0 [DF] len 32 proto UDP (17) len 4
```

Another post-processing command, `pcap`, can be used to generate `pcap-ng` files
from a set of stored Retis events. For this to work the collection has to be
done using (at least) the `pcap` profile. For now `pcap-ng` files can be
generated by filtering the events using a single probe.

```none
$ retis -p pcap,generic collect -o
$ retis pcap --probe tp:net:netif_receive_skb | tcpdump -nnr -
$ retis pcap --probe tp:net:net_dev_start_xmit -o retis.pcap
$ wireshark retis.pcap
```

Some post-processing commands (eg. `print`, `sort`) can generate a long output.
In such case a pager is automatically used in case the output is larger than the
current terminal. By default `less` is used but the pager can be explicitly
chosen by setting the `PAGER` environment variable, or unset by setting
`NOPAGER`.

```none
$ PAGER=more retis sort
$ NOPAGER=1 retis sort
```

## Profiles and customization

Retis has the concept of profiles, which are a predefined set of cli arguments
(e.g. collectors for the `collect` command). Profiles are meant to improve user
experience to provide a comprehensive and consistent configuration to Retis
aimed at operating on pre-defined topics.

```none
$ retis -p generic collect
...
```

Available profiles can be listed using the `profile` command.

```none
$ retis profile list
...
```

Profiles can be extended by using cli arguments. Cli arguments can also be used
without a profile. One example is adding probes while collecting events.

```none
$ retis -p dropmon collect -p tp:skb:consume_skb
...
$ retis collect -p tp:skb:kfree_skb -p kprobe:ovs_ct_clear
...
```

New profiles can be written and used if stored in `/etc/retis/profiles` or
`$HOME/.config/profiles`. Here is an
[example profile](https://github.com/retis-org/retis/blob/main/test_data/profiles/example.yaml)
with inlined comments. If a profile is generic enough, consider contributing it!

## Filtering

Tracing packets can generate a lot of events, some of which are not interesting.
Retis implements a filtering logic to only report packets matching the filter or
being tracked (see [tracking](#tracking)).
Retis has two ways of filtering and both can coexist. The former is based
on the packet content, the latter is based on metadata.

Packet filtering uses a pcap-filter syntax. See `man pcap-filter` for an
overview on the syntax. Upon execution the pcap-filter gets compiled in cBPF
and subsequently translated into an eBPF program which in turn gets consumed by
the probes.

```none
$ retis collect -f 'tcp port 443'
...
```

Packet filtering can be of two types: L2 and L3. Retis automatically detects and
generates L2/L3 filters based on the expression. This allows to match both packets
fully formed and packets not having a valid L2 header yet (`sk_buff` having invalid
`mac_header` but valid and set `network_header`). One advantage of this approach is
the ability to match locally generated packets while still allowing matches based
on L2 criteria.

For example, the following filter:

```none
$ retis collect -f 'arp or tcp port 443'
L2+L3 packet filter(s) loaded
...
```

Internally generates two filters. For probes where only the `network_header`
is valid and set in the `sk_buff` the filter would match packets with tcp
source or destination port 443. For `sk_buff` with valid `mac_header` both arp
and tcp packets would be matched.
Please note that some limitations exist and they are a direct consequence of
libpcap capabilities.
For example filters like:

```none
$ retis collect -f 'ether broadcast or tcp port 443'
L2 packet filter(s) loaded
...
```

Will only generate L2 filters, that is, packets will be matched only if
`mac_header` is set.
For further information about the reason an L3 filter gets skipped, please
use the `--log-level debug` option, i.e.:

```none
$ retis --log-level debug collect -f 'ether broadcast or tcp port 443'
...
DEBUG Skipping L3 filter generation (Could not compile the filter: libpcap error: not a broadcast link).
INFO  L2 packet filter(s) loaded
...
```

Metadata filtering instead allows to write filters that match packets based
on their metadata.
Metadata filters can match against any subfield of the `sk_buff` and subsequent
inner data structures.
Meta filtering also automatically follows struct pointers, so indirect access to
structures pointed by an `sk_buff` field is possible.

```none
$ retis collect -m 'sk_buff.dev.nd_net.net.ns.inum == 4026531840'
...
```

The comparison operators are:
- "==" for *equal to*
- "!=" for *not equal to*
- "<" and "<=" for *less than* and *less than or equal to*
- ">" and ">=" for *greater than* and *greater than or equal to*

At the moment, only number and string comparisons are supported.
All the comparison operators support numbers (both signed and unsigned).
For strings only the operator *equal to* is supported, furthermore, the
string must be enclosed between *quotes*.

```none
$ retis collect -m 'sk_buff.dev.name == "eth0"'
...
```

The example above shows how strings can be matched and how they are
required to be quoted.

Metadata filtering, being a BTF-based way of filtering, is theoretically
not limited to `sk_buff`, so from a generic point of view it can support
all filters under the form *struct_type_name.field1.field2.field3* with
the above constraints, but for the time being only `struct sk_buff` is
supported.
This implies that the `sk_buff` keyword **MUST** always be present and **MUST**
always appear first.

It is possible to combine packet and meta filtering, and doing so is just a
matter of specifying their respective options and filters.

```none
$ retis collect -f 'tcp port 443' -m 'sk_buff.dev.name == "eth0"'
...
```

The above options will be concatenated, meaning that both filters must match
in order to have a match and generate events for packets.

Meta filtering has some known limitations, in particular no bitfield
support is available and only one field at the time can be matched.

## Tracking

Retis does its best to track packets in the networking stack, and does it in
different ways. Note that tracking packets is not a built-in feature of the
Linux kernel and doing so is complex and cannot be 100% foolproof (but of course
bugs should be reported and fixed).

1. A Retis core built-in feature generates unique identifiers by tracking the
   data part of [socket buffers](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/include/linux/skbuff.h?h=v6.3#n737).
   The socket buffer is also included in the identifier so we can track clones
   and friends. This core skb tracking logic is used by the filtering part for
   Retis to track packets after they were modified (e.g. NAT). Full details on
   the implementation can be found
   [in the sources](https://github.com/retis-org/retis/blob/main/src/core/tracking/skb_tracking.rs).

2. A collector, `skb-tracking`, retrieves the core tracking information (unique
   identifier and socket buffer address) and reports it in the event. Without
   enabling this collector, skb tracking information won't be reported and can't
   be used at post-processing time.

3. The `ovs` collector tracks packets in upcalls so we can follow a packet
   being sent to the OpenVSwitch user-space daemon, even if it is re-injected
   later on.
