# Pcap

## Probe filtering

Retis supports generating `pcapng` files from collected events by running the `pcap`
subcommand. It does so in two distinct ways:

- Generating a pcap file from events at a particular probe.
- Generating a pcap file from all events

If `--probe` option is used, the resulting capture will only contain packets that
were seen on that probe.

If `--probe` is not used, packets from all probes will be mixed together.

In the resulting pcap file, the interface information attached to the packets
indicates the probe where it was captured at.

## Wireshark / tshark support

The pcapng file generated by Retis contains some extra information that
[Wireshark](https://www.wireshark.org/) and [tshark](https://tshark.dev/)
are able to read and interpret using the Retis wireshark plugin.

This information is just skipped if the capture file is read by a client that
does not support it, such as `tcpdump`.

### Installing the wireshark plugin

To install the Wireshark plugin, install the required build-dependencies, e.g:

```
dnf install -y gcc make pkg-config wireshark-devel json-c-devel
```

And then run:

```
make wireshark-install
```

Wireshark version greater or equal to 4.3 is required.

### Using the Wireshark plugin

By just installing the Retis Wireshark plugin, event metadata will be displayed
alongside each packet.

However, the Retis Wireshark plugin registers the Retis protocol dynamically
(after reading the first block with the json-schema definition), and this comes
with a limitation: `tshark` display filters do not work. The reason is that
`tshark` evaluates the filter _before_ starting the packet dissection.

To solve this important use-case, the Retis Wireshark plugin has one "Preference"
called `retis.schema` that allows users to provide the json schema manually to the
plugin. Using this option, `tshark` can be used to filter on retis data, e.g:

```
tshark -r some.pcap -o "retis.schema:schema.json" -Y 'retis.ct.state=="new"'
```

The schema file can be generated using `retis schema`.

#### TCP sequence analysis

Retis captures will contain the same packet multiple times because Retis generates
events from many probes and the same packet can go through the same probe multiple
times.

For that reason, Wireshark's TCP Sequence Analysis can incorrectly flag some packets
as duplicates. This feature can be disabled via the “Analyze TCP sequence numbers”
TCP dissector preference (or by adding `-o tcp.analyze_sequence_numbers:false`) to
the `wireshark` or `tshark` command line.

### Internals: Pcap-ng custom blocks and options

Retis uses pcap-ng's extensibility to add two extra pieces of information in
custom blocks and options that use the custom PEN 70000.

- **Schema block**: The first event in the capture is a custom block that contains
the [json-schema (2020-12)](https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12) of the Retis event.
- **Event option**: Alongside each packet, Retis inserts a custom option with the
json encoded event.

With this information, and the Retis Wireshark plugin, all the metadata captured
by Retis can be displayed in Wireshark.
